The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
The subject of this program is science fantasy.
We won't be able to define that term to everyone's satisfaction. In fact, we won't even try to
define it. But we can provide some elements or qualities that would need to be present in a
work for it to be called science fantasy. Let's consider it first according to the implications
of the term itself, a combination of science and fantasy.
For purposes of delineation, consider first a book of very hard science fiction such as
Tau Zero or Hal Clemett's Mission of Gravity that include elements of strict science extrapolation
from well-known physics and astronomy.
Yes, Tau Zero being based on relativity and the time compression and traveling at a very fast speed.
And Mission of Gravity taking place on a planet where there is varying gravity due to a massive
gravity of the planet, but it has a rapid spin allowing for greater gravitation at the poles,
but a lesser gravitation at the equator.
Both books, of course, have fascinating plots to them. They're very interesting to read.
But neither book would work if it weren't for the science behind them. Both are very hard in their
physical sciences.
And although some readers might consider them fantastic, they are really not a part of that
genre known as fantasy. Everything in those books is a strict extrapolation from well-known physics.
On the other end of the scale, we might consider some books that are truly fantasy books.
Things like The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien. This is a strict fantasy. There's no science
involved. It's all magic and sorcery. Creatures that are not anything known to humans today.
The story is fantasy in its truest sense. There's no science fiction elements at all.
And the same as in Conan the Barbarian series by Robert E. Howard.
The hero is a brash barbarian who roamed the earth during the Hyborian Age.
There's no science to the book at all. There's some remnants of factual history,
but it's mostly just fantasy.
And in between these two extremes, I guess you could call them the hard science and the pure fantasy.
That's where science fantasy would exist. And I think we might look at almost the
the epitome of science fantasy, a book by Rogers Alasney called Jack of Shadows.
And the reason that's a good example of the genre we're considering on our show today
is that it's exactly half science and half fantasy. The world that Jack lives on is,
it doesn't rotate. It has one light side and one dark side. On the dark side, magic works.
People have special powers that are pure wizardry, pure fantasy. But on the light side,
the inhabitants have to go by the rules that we understand, the rules of science. Magic doesn't
work. And by the fact the world does not rotate, these haves never meet, they never change.
Although it's possible for inhabitants of either side to travel to the other side.
This is brought into vivid focus when Jack, a character living on the dark side, a magical being
travels to the light side. And in order to find some information which he has to extract from a
computer, when the reader is reading this jump from the dark side to the light side, it's almost
as if he's reading a different book. The change is so abrupt. Yes, it's an extremely abrupt
transition from the dark side to the light. On the dark side, Zalazny is very skilled at relating
strange creatures, alien environments. And you get used to a totally fantastic book with creatures
you've never seen before, with heroic actions, with magic. And all of a sudden you're in a world
where computers work, where Jack has got a job at university. Now he's there for a purpose,
as you said, to gain information from the computer. But it's almost like you're reading a different
book when you go from one half of the world of the world to the other. It's also, I think,
the epitome of the attraction of this type of book when Jack uses some of his magical powers
within the scientific background of the light side. And it's a lot of fun because all of a
sudden you're introducing these fantastic elements into a logical and orderly scene.
This is, I think, the attraction of the science fantasy for most people.
It could be said to be sort of a wish fulfillment, couldn't it?
I'd go along with that. I think it is. Everybody wants, especially as a child, as you're growing
up, you want magic to work. And at least in some degree, we still retain that wish as we get older.
This sort of brings that out. It lets you let magic work in your mind, at least, for a while.
But Jack has a serious quest in that book. He's different than almost any other, well,
he's different than any other dark sider in that he's restless. He wants answers to certain
questions. And he sets out on a quest, well, it happens to be a quest of vengeance, but along
the way, he has it elevated to another level of seriousness, whereby he travels to the center
of the earth and destroys the huge machine which keeps the earth from spinning, which keeps one
half in light and one half in darkness. And his intention in doing that is to, well, to destroy
the world as it is. Art could be to create the world as he thinks it ought to be. Good point,
because when he stops that machine, what he does is start the world spinning. And there's a series
of light and dark, you know, day and night. And Jack realizes that what he's done is to blend magic
and science. He says that magic will still belong to the dark, you know, to nighttime, whereas
science will be in the light. It's sort of symbolic, I guess. Yes, doesn't Jack have a problem in
determining which is real, the magic or the science in some part of that novel? Yeah, he asks one of
his friends on the dark side called Morningstar, who is an amazing giant-like creature, non-human,
totally. But he's very wise and he seems to have answers to most things. But Jack asks him,
which is the correct way to be? Or which is the correct side to live on? Which is real?
You know, the light side or the dark side? Science or magic? Morningstar simply tells him
that both are correct. It depends on which way you look at it. And I think, therefore, the book is
partly dealing with the two ways of approaching reality. Zalazny might be saying that you have
to have some of both in order to be, well, I guess to have a balanced view on reality and on life.
And in that sense, I think it's a symbolic book. Zalazny has also written a series of books based
on alternate worlds called The Chronicles of Amber. This is a series of five novels, at least five so
far. They are The Nine Princes in Amber, The Guns of Abelon, The Sign of the Unicorn, The Hand of
Oberon, and The Courts of Chaos. This series is a prime example, I think, of science fantasy.
It's a true adventure story all the way through it. It is one continuous story. The basis of the
idea of the story is that the real world is a world called amber. And amber casts shadows of itself
throughout what we would call alternate or parallel universes. The earth that we live on is but one
of these shadow worlds of which there are an infinite number. This goes all the way until all order
is lost and only chaos remains. This is the opposite end of the spectrum from the real world of amber.
Amber is ruled by a family, a family of immortals. Oberon is the king, the father, but he has nine
sons and I believe it's four daughters. They are all immortal. They all have the blood of amber in them.
It's their blood and their power that keeps amber in existence along with this pattern which
seems to be the force that keeps order in amber and therefore throughout the rest of all these
alternate universes. The trouble starts when this family, when the father, the king Oberon,
suddenly disappears and there's a struggle for power among the brothers to see who is going to
become king. I think that Zalazny is very crafty in the way that he leads us into the story with
the main character Corwin. He is at the very first of the series in the very first book Nine
Princes and Amber. We wake up with Corwin in a hospital. He doesn't know who he is or what he is
where he is and he bluffs his way into knowledge of who he is and as he learns we learn and begins
the story in that manner as he wakes up on earth in a totally normal seemingly scientific sound
logical atmosphere but in very short order things start happening that are totally fantastic
and yet it's kept in balance because he is on this earth as he begins to leave it and go into
the other alternate worlds. The blend is really well handled I think. With Zalazny I think it's
important to realize that no matter what kind of book he writes there will always be an element of
fantasy in it. He seems to enjoy working in that kind of field. In one of his most recent works,
a novel called Roadmarks, he has people traveling down what appears to be a freeway
but the exit ramps lead off to certain places in time and in space that could not possibly be
along the road like one exit would be off to Babylon in the fifth century and then the next
exit would be somewhere in the future in New York. It's a fascinating book following the travels of
one specific character and the outcomes of his travels.
Possibly one of the most eloquent of science fantasy writers is Jack Vance who is not known
quite as well as some of the other writers but has written some fabulous science fantasy stories.
Yeah his classic book I think in the field of science fantasy is called The Dying Earth
published in 1950 although he was writing it through the mid-40s. For a number of years it
existed more or less as an underground book as it's called meaning it was read mostly by people
who were well into the field and understood most of the authors who were writing but
the last few years Vance has gained a tremendous reputation but The Dying Earth is a collection
of stories and Vance has used a particular environment for his stories in that book.
He conceives of the earth as the title indicates dying. The sun is a red star which is almost out
it's barely giving out any warmth. The earth is millions of years in the future the mountains
are worn down the it's a very softened environment the forests are old decrepit there are only
probably a few thousand people on the earth and they know that their time is approaching you know
where their lives and their earth is going to going to end but the interesting part of that is that
science is dead science has not been around for perhaps millions of years magic works
and the people who are left on earth are mostly magicians they have spells
they have tremendous powers that they use to either fight each other or get what they want whatever
and Vance has written about six or seven stories around this particular
in this particular environment and I might mention just a couple of the stories to illustrate
why this can be called science fantasy in one of the first stories in the book there's a magician
called pandalume who knows almost all of the spells who was a genius at magic he's admired by
almost everybody who exists on earth and he is studying a brand new field that he's just discovered
and he's fascinated with it and he says the the whole underpinning of the universe is based upon
this field and it's called mathematics which is kind of interesting because here are magicians
looking back and rediscovering a science which has not been around for millions of years in another
story um ulandore there's a ruins of an ancient city which one of the magicians discovers and
it's full of these metallic vehicles which we would recognize as cars or some kind of
device of transportation he's fascinated with them learns how to use them again a reference to the
past of the fact that science did once exist and in the last story in the volume perhaps one of the
major ones called guy all of sphere now guy all is a hero a magician but a hero nonetheless
who believes that magic is limited he gets tired of it he goes off on a quest to reach what is
called the museum of man which is supposed to contain all of the knowledge of the human race
he finds the museum and after a number of difficulties he learns that far in the past
earthmen had the capacity to space travel to leave the planet and go to other places
and since earth is dying since it's not going to last that much longer and since magic seems to be a
dead end he decides to take up science and see if he can do something about getting people back off
the earth so it's sort of an interesting approach to science fantasy and one would have to read
vance to really appreciate the man's style the beauty of his language the the the brilliance of
the way he describes things it's almost amazing that in just a few words he can paint such a vivid
visual picture in the story lion the wanderer lion is a sort of vagabond he is enticed by a girl
into going and trying to steal a tapestry which is guarded by tune the unavoidable
and when lion creeps up upon where the tapestry is hung and jerks it aside tune is hiding behind
it and lion runs off he's a very swift almost blindingly swift person and he runs away from him
but tune is following him right on his heels and lion uses some magic a magical hoop which allows
him to become invisible and he steps through it and vanishes and he's standing there thinking
he's hiding and all of a sudden a voice from behind him says i am tuned the unavoidable
and then the scene shifts back to the girl who has just received two long threads from the tapestry
and a message from tune who said he's sending her these two long threads because of the two
beautiful large golden eyes he's added to his cloak that kind of summary i don't think um
can really convey to people the alianess that jack vance can uh can communicate in his writing
Barry Malzberg a noted critic and author both of science fiction is has made the statement that
jack vance is the greatest portrayer of total alianess in science fiction and i quote he is
simply one of the best there ever has been at grasping that the material of science fiction
will feel differently to those who live through it and has brought that difference alive and
malzberg also feels that jack vance is one of the ten most important writers in the history of the
field it's a shame that he's not better known but he's a very private person he hasn't publicized
himself he hasn't um gone out of his way to uh to drum interest in his work but he has won both
hugos and nebulas uh one of his hugos came in 1962 for the story the dragon masters
which would also qualify as an excellent example of science fantasy um
basically and briefly that the plot takes place place on a world called airlift
it's a very bleak world in an unknown corner of the universe but it once was part of the human
empire uh it's been cut off now because space travel has been forgotten and the people on this
world have i guess degenerated into a sort of a middle ages type existence uh they live in castles
they they breed animals they exist on agriculture they have sort of a futile existence but the animal
that they breed mostly are uh is dragons and they breed all sizes of dragons dragons to fight with
dragons to ride dragons to cultivate with uh a fascinating society advances built up and the
conflict occurs when a a group of mutated humans come to the world and try to take off the men
who are here as slaves and a war occurs between between this dragon culture and between these
these men these mutated men who have space weapons a very interesting book and again in the in the
style advances is famous for another author and macafe has written some books dealing with
dragons in fact there are six of them in total the books are grouped into two trilogies one the
dragonriders of per and the other a trilogy on the harper hall of pern through the different
books you find out that early in pern's history or at least when mankind had been on pern they had
to genetically alter some of the native life form which was a small dragon like creature not much
bigger than a than a small bird they had to genetically alter the small dragons and make
them into much larger dragons uh those familiar from from human mythology in order to fight an
invading alien spore from what they call the red star it's actually a planet orbiting outside the
orbit of pern the three books and the dragonriders of pern series are the dragonflight dragon quest
and the white dragon and it follows the adventures of several of the main characters in the series
that being florr who is the leader of brindon weir which is an enclave of dragons and flanore
his brother and lesa who is the weirwoman are really the the driving force behind brindon weir
the first book dragonflight is based around the adventures of those three characters and it picks
up again in dragon quest and then goes on to white dragon which was a nationwide bestseller
and it revolves around the adventures of jackson and his dragon named ruth and their adventures at
brindon weir and again in another part of the planet one of the most interesting aspects of the
novels is the bond between the dragons and their riders this bond is formed when the dragons are
born and goes with them throughout both of their lives yeah at first jackson has to be careful how
how he uses ruth the dragon he bonds himself with because he's a young lord and he's due to take
over one of the holes or one of the almost like a feudal manner an organizational structure on the
planet but he's not yet ready for that and he's not supposed to have a dragon of his own but he
does bond himself to ruth and he and ruth become extremely close and we find out that the dragons
are highly intelligent um they communicate telepathically with their human uh i guess you'd
call them mates or bonders if you want to call them that uh and jackson teaches ruth various things
he trains ruth to do what these dragons have been bred to do which is to fight the thread nobody knows
this yet because ruth is different he is smaller and he's white but he does have special powers
and as it turns out it's a fortunate thing that jackson did train ruth and that he did bond himself
to him because uh there's a tremendous threat that comes from various places but mostly with the
threads jackson and ruth are equipped to handle it and uh in fighting the threads it almost becomes
a heroic task for jackson he saves the men of pern yes it's really an unusual incident that
ruth was allowed to live he he wasn't really hatching out of his shell but jackson leaped into
the the pit where the hatching was taking place and broke the shell and let him out
her other trilogy revolves around the harper hall or the uh menstruals of pern which go about
singing songs which carry about various information and are used as teaching tools and these stories
revolve around uh robinton the master harper of pern are the leader of the menstruals and uh menoli
his uh female apprentice who's the first girl in the harper hall in all those books i think
mccaffrey has shown a tremendous talent at developing an entire world you know by the time you finish
the pern books you feel it that you've been in a different place you know very different from earth
totally believable um and that skill i think is reflected in the fact that she's won both a
hugo and a nebula back in 60s 1967 and 68 and she was the first woman science fiction writer to win
both of those awards
um
Another entirely different way almost of looking at science fantasy would be to simply consider
the feeling or mood of a work.
Is there an atmosphere for instance of melodrama? Is the conflict basic good versus evil with a
totally black villain and a shining too good to be true hero? When you sense these qualities in
a work you probably have something that can be termed science fantasy.
What about Superman for instance? Is he a science fiction character or is he science fantasy?
It's easy to see him as science fiction I think. After all he's an alien from another planet and
the special powers that he has are simply due to the fact he's here on earth and his being,
his metabolism, his alien structure allows him to fly and to perform superhuman feats but on
his own planet he couldn't do those things. So we could look at that book simply as a book about
an alien on earth and call it a science fiction book. But since it really doesn't have any scientific
basis behind his powers are the abilities which he acquires simply by being under a different
type of sun which really doesn't have any drastic difference in radiation between the red giant star
which he is under and the yellow G type star of earth. There really is any scientific basis to
his powers. I would say he's a fantasy character. I would say he's a fantasy character too but I
would think it would be more based on the fact that he's a larger than life hero. He's not really
an alien in the sense that we've come to know them in science fiction such as works by Larry Niven
or by Hal Clement. It's really a human character and he's there as a hero that's his whole purpose.
It's a melodrama in many ways. It's very very good against very very evil. It's really in that sense
a fantasy creature. What about Star Wars? That's most people I would think would consider that to be a
science fiction movie. It has spaceships, it has ray guns, all sorts of fantastic technologically
looking devices. But it's really been put forward as a science fantasy. I mean once again you have
a larger than life hero or heroes. One of the ultimate bad guys ever created by the cinema,
Darth Vader. The science in it is really in the background. They have no real hard scientific
explanation for the items, the scientific gadgets that they have. They simply turn them on and they
work. That's an element of science fantasy. I think this gets us into the specific problems that
you have when you're trying to define science fantasy. Technically speaking in Star Wars there's
nothing there that cannot be explained by extrapolation of current known physics and science.
There's just nothing there that is really a fantasy like say magic. It's all science fiction.
However the story itself is flowing with fantasy elements in terms of style and the way it's formatted
as almost a melodrama or a western or a soap opera in space. It's also an intentional blend of styles
in things like for instance the lightsabers. The technology of science fiction is used there to
create a saber that uses some sort of force field and yet you're still dealing with the stylistic
element of a sword fight which gets you back into the fantasy realm. So it's an interesting blend
of science fiction elements with the fantasy style and this too I think should be termed
science fantasy. One other series of books that might be mentioned in this same stylistic category
is another series of works by Jack Vance known as the the Chai series, Planet of Adventure,
written between 1968 and 1970. Yeah that book has a almost a pure science fiction beginning.
A scout ship is wrecked on another planet and it looks like it's going to be a straight science
fiction adventure but very quickly you learned this is planet Chai. It really has no science to it.
It becomes almost a sword and sorcery book. Although the the sorcery part is downplayed. It
becomes mostly sword fights, adventure quests, saving maidens, etc. etc. by the hero Adam Wreath
who is a full-blown hero much in the in the in the way that Superman or Luke Skywalker would be.
And I think we have to mention some other names of authors who've written science fantasy.
Elsprague the Camp and Fletcher Pratt for instance collaborated on a series of books.
Lath Brackett wrote a series of a fact a trilogy of books based around a character Eric John Start.
Even Robert Heinlein who most people would call a fairly classic science fiction writer
tried his hand at one the science fantasy novel Glory Road back in 1963 which isn't bad.
And you have Paul Anderson of course who wrote things like The High Crusade and Three Hearts
and Three Lions that would be science fantasy. And probably one of the most recent entries or
one of the most recent authors in science fantasy feel is Jack Chalker who's been writing a series
of novels called the Well World novels with their protagonist Nathan Brazil. And also Philip
Jose Farmer who wrote his River Whirl series in 1971 which has many aspects of science fantasy in it.
I think everyone enjoys a rousing adventure tale especially when it includes magic, sword fights,
unicorns, dragons and other such fantastic fare. When a fantasy adventure like that is combined
with the more believable elements of science fiction the blend is somehow especially attractive.
The worlds of science fantasy are quite unlimited and hopefully will continue to make their appearance
on the science fiction bookcase.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College Odessa, Texas.